Except for the United States, every major industrialized nation in the world has agreed either to stabilize or reduce emissions of carbon dioxide (CO[sub2]), the most prevalent greenhouse gas. Interestingly enough, given the limits of U.S. national policy, concern over climate has stimulated numerous state and local environmental and energy policy initiatives.

In May 1990, with support from EPA, the Center for Global Change initiated a project to collect and analyze state and local legislative bills, laws, and policy proposals having either direct or incidental effects on greenhouse gas emissions. The material presented here derives from the resulting report, entitled Cool Tools.

Groundwork to collect important baseline data and set policy goals is underway in a number of jurisdictions. 
California leads in this area, with 1988 legislation calling for the state's energy commission to conduct a comprehensive study and provide policy recommendations to the governor and legislature. A comprehensive plan in Vermont includes a schedule of goals to reduce both greenhouse gas emissions and per capita nonrenewable energy consumption. 
Connecticut's 1992 legislature strengthened its 1991 omnibus global legislation, adding annual CO[sub2] emissions reporting requirements and calling for reduction goals in the state's 1993 energy plan. Minnesota launched a program to inventory the state's CO[sub2] emissions and develop incentives to reduce them.

But should states respond to climate change, a global problem? Implementing policies at the state level is essential to slowing the buildup of atmospheric greenhouse gases. 
State and local governments hold or share the authority to regulate some of the most important activities affecting emissions: utility regulation, building codes, and land use planning. 
Also, as large users and taxers of energy, states make policies that directly increase or reduce greenhouse emissions. 
Ultimately, whatever federal program is developed, there will need to be a complementary set of state actions.

Consider electricity generation, which represents approximately 35 percent of U.S. CO[sub2] emissions. 
Established state authority over rate making and plant siting now extends to choices regarding fuels, as well as conservation initiatives to defer the need for new sources of supply. 
Initiatives to capture the economic benefits of least-cost planning for electric and gas utilities are some of the most significant actions states are taking to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
Several states now require that utilities give preference to conservation and demand-side management measures before considering new power plant construction. 
Numerous other states have developed or are developing least-cost planning processes through regulatory proceedings.

Meaningful opportunities for efficiency also he in strengthening state and municipal building codes. 
At least three states and several communities in California require buyers to make conservation investments when they purchase a house.

In the absence of federal policy, state and municipal initiatives provide an ideal testing ground for environmental strategies and leadership for the nation. 
Small-scale experiments allow for greater innovation than federal ones. 
Moreover, this "laboratory of the states" allows a mix of strategies--suitable to different parts of the country having different climates, tastes, industrial bases, power sources, and commuting patterns--to emerge. 
Modest trials also facilitate evaluation, important whenhen one state's proposals are adopted by other jurisdictions or adapted for federal application.

Connecticut is among the leaders in pursuing small-scale demonstration programs, particularly with respect to energy use by state agencies. 
Recent legislation establishes energy performance standards for new and existing state buildings, implemented by a technical advisory group to recommend standards for commercial buildings. 
Connecticut has also set fuel efficiency requirements for state fleet purchases and has plans to increase public transit ridership and occupancy levels for passenger vehicles.

A 1991 National Academy of Sciences study estimated that the United States could reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by up to 40 percent of 1990 levels at "very low cost." 
Prominent on the list of low cost options are areas appropriate for state and local treatment transportation' efficiency investment in new buildings, electric utility supply decisions, and forestry.

As a practical matter, local government is often more successful than federal government at initiating and implementing policy. 
Citizens are more likely to respond positively to statutes that address their community's needs than to the often broad or ambiguous guidelines coming from national or international bodies.

There are economic considerations, too. 
States already tax gasoline, electricity, and other forms of energy; however, such taxes currently do not reflect varying environmental impacts, and thus fail to communicate the true costs of energy. 
Incorporating environmental costs into prices will require complementing, replacing, or augmenting direct regulation with innovative fiscal tools to promote environmentally beneficial results, such as the sale of energy-efficient equipment. 
Legislation enacted in California in 1990, for instance, imposes gradual gasoline tax increases and earmarks portions of the revenue for environmental damage mitigation.

Many state and local governments participate in EPA's Green Lights program, in which participants survey existing lighting facilities and install energy efficient equipment when it is profitable and does not compromise lighting quality. In Maryland, participation in Green Lights is expected to cut the state's lighting bill by 25 percent, for a savings of $10.5 million per year.

It makes sense for states to make energy efficiency investments that retain dollars in the local economy, rather than spending them on interstate or international energy supplies. Particularly in the building and utility sectors, states can realize substantial opportunities for savings that only come up every 40 years or so as buildings stocks and electricity generating plants are replaced. Solar and renewable investments typically provide several times as many jobs per dollar as more capital intensive fossil investments. Washington, for instance, estimates that CO[sub2] savings from tightening residential energy codes will reach 3.3 million tons 7annually--with energy efficiency savings worth approximately $16.5 million, at $5.00 per ton, by 2005. That's a savings worth noting.
